In this lecture, we're
going to talk about
pattern matching in strings
using regular expressions.
Regular expressions or regexes
are written in a condensed
formatting language.
In general, you can think of
regular expression
as a pattern which
you give to a regex processor
with some source data.
The processor then parses that
source data using the
pattern and returns chunks
of texts back to
the data scientist
or programmer for
further manipulation.
There's really three main reasons
you should want to do this.
To check whether a pattern
exists within some source data,
to get all instances of
a complex pattern from
some source data,
or to clean
your source data using
a pattern generally
through strings splitting.
Regexes are not
trivial but they are
foundational technique for data
cleaning in data
science applications.
A solid understanding of
regexes will help you quickly and
efficiently manipulate text data
for further data
science application.
Now, you could teach
a whole course
on regular expressions alone,
especially if you
wanted to demystify
how the regex parsing
Engine works and efficient
mechanisms for parsing text.
In this lecture, I
want to give you
a basic understanding
of how regex works.
Enough knowledge that, with
a little directed sleuthing,
you'll be able to make sense of
the regex patterns
you see others using,
and you can build up
your own practical knowledge of
how to use regexes to
improve your data cleaning.
By the end of this lecture,
you'll be able to understand
the basics of
regular expressions.
How to define patterns
for matching,
how to apply these
patterns to strings,
and how to use those strings for
those patterns in
data processing.
Finally, and note that,
in order to best learn regexes,
you need to write regexes.
I encourage you to stop
the video at any time and
try out new patterns
or syntaxes you learn.
So first, we'll import
the re module which is
where the Python stores
regular expression libraries.
So import RE.
There are several main
processing functions
and read that you might use.
The first, Match, checks
for a string match
that is at the beginning of
the string and returns a Boolean.
Similarly, Search,
checks for a match
anywhere in the string
and returns a Boolean.
Let's create some texts
for an example.
So text, "This is a good day."
Now, let's see if it's
a good day or not.
So we can do if re.search,
look for good, text,
and the first parameter
here is the pattern.
Then we'll print, wonderful,
if good's there, else will
print alas and a frowny face.
So in addition to checking
for conditionals,
we can segment a string.
The work that regex does
here is called tokenizing,
where this string
is separated into
substrings based on patterns.
Tokenizing is a core activity in
natural language processing
which we won't
talk much about here but
you'll study in the future.
The Findall and
Split functions will
parse the string for
us and return chunks.
Let's try an example.
So text, "Amy works diligently.
Amy gets good grades.
Our student Amy is successful."
It sounds like
a very positive thing.
So this is a bit of
a fabricated example,
but let's split on this
all instances of Amy.
So re.split, Amy as the pattern
where we want to match,
and text as our text.
You'll notice that
Split has returned
an empty string followed by
a number of statements about Amy,
all its elements of a list.
If we wanted to count how many
times we've talked about Amy,
we could use Findall.
So re.findall, Amy and text.
Okay, so we've seen that
Search looks for some
pattern and returns
a Boolean that Split will use
a pattern for creating
a list of substrings,
and that Findall will look for
a pattern and pull
out all occurrences.
Now, we know how
the Python RegEx API works.
Let's talk a little bit more
about complex patterns.
The regex specification
standard defines
a markup language to
describe patterns in text.
Let's start with anchors.
Anchors specify the start
and/or end of the string
that you're trying to match.
The caret character means Start,
and the dollar sign
character means End.
If you put caret before a string,
it means that the texts
that the regex processor
retrieves must start with
the string you specify.
For ending, you have to put
the dollar sign character
after the string.
It means that the texts regex
retrieves must end with
a string you specified.
Here's an example. So text,
"Amy works diligently.
Amy gets good grades,
and our student Amy
is successful."
Let's see if this
begins with Amy.
So we could do re.search
and then inside
quotes as our pattern
and we'll put caret Amy.
So we want to match Amy at
the beginning and then text.
Notice that re.search
actually returned to us
a new object called
an re.Match object.
An re.Match object, always has
a Boolean value of true
as something was found.
So you can always evaluate it in
an If statement like
we did earlier.
The rendering of the match object
also tells you what
pattern was matched,
in this case, the word Amy,
and the location of the match
was in as in the span.
Let's talk more about patterns
and start with character classes.
Let's create a string of
single learners grades over
a semester in one course across
all of their assignments.
So grades equals,
and I'll just put
a string of As, Bs and Cs.
No Ds for this student.
If we want to answer
the question,
How many Bs were
in the grade list,
we could just use
B as our pattern.
So re.findall B and grades,
and we see that
there's three here.
If we wanted to count the
number of As or Bs in the list,
we can't use A and
B since this is
used to match all As
followed immediately by a B.
Instead, we put the characters A
and B inside square brackets.
So we do re.findall
and then we do
square brackets AB and
then passing grades.
Here, we can see the whole list
of As and Bs that are found.
This is called The Set Operator.
You can also include a range of
characters which are
ordered Alpha numerically.
For instance, if we want to refer
to all lowercase characters,
we could use A-Z in
the square brackets.
Let's build a simple
regex to parse out
all instances where
the student received an A
followed by a B or a C. So
re.findall and then we'll use
the set operator with
A and the set operator
with E-C and parse in the grades.
Notice how the AB pattern
describes the set of
possible characters which
could be either A or
B while the A and
then followed by
the B-C pattern denotes two sets
of characters which must have
been matched back to back.
You can write this
pattern by using
the pipe operator which means OR.
So we could do re.findall AB
or AC in quotes directly as
our pattern with grades.
We can use the caret with
the set operator to
negate our results.
For instance, if we
wanted to parse out
only the grades
which were not A's,
we would do re.findall,
and then we'd use
the set operator,
this is important
caret A and grades.
Here we only have B's and C's.
So note this carefully,
the caret was previously
matched to the beginning of
a string as an anchor point.
But inside of the set operator,
the caret and its other
special characters
we'll be talking about,
they lose their meaning.
This can be a bit confusing.
What do you think the result
of this operation would be?
So we'll do re.findall,
caret set operator, then
another caret A, and grades.
Just take a minute, look at that,
and reflect on what
we just talked about.
What do you think it would be?
So it's an empty list, because
the regex is saying
we want to match
any value at the beginning of
the string which is not an A,
and our string starts with an A,
so there's no match found.
Remember, when you're
using the set operator,
you're doing character
based matching.
So you're matching individual
characters in an or method.
Okay. So we talked about anchors,
and matching to the beginning,
and end of patterns.
We've talked about characters
using sets with the set notation.
We've talked about
character negation
and how the pipe of character,
allows us to use or
in our operations.
Let's move on to quantifiers.
Quantifiers are the number
of times you want to pattern to
be matched in order to
actually count as a match.
The most basic quantifiers,
the expression of E,
curly brace M, N curly brace,
where E is the expression or
character we're matching,
M is the minimum number
of times you want
it to be matched,
and N is the maximum number of
times the item could be matched.
Let's use these grades
as an example.
How many times has
this student been on
a back-to-back A streak?
So we do this with re.findall
where the character we're
interested in is A,
so that takes the place
of E, curly brace,
we want to have at
least two of them,
so that's our m value of two,
and we'll just have
some big value.
We use ten here,
and we'll pass this
in as our grade.
So we're using two as
our mean, but ten is our max.
So we see that there
were two streaks;
one where the student
had four A's,
and one where they
only had two A's.
We might try and do this
using single values,
and just repeating the pattern.
So we might try re.findall,
and then we've got a capital A,
and we want a minimax match
of one for those capital A,
minimax match of one
for those all grades.
As you can see, this is different
than the first example.
The first pattern is looking for
a combination of two A's,
up to ten A's in a row,
so it sees four A's
as a single streak.
The second pattern is looking
for two A's back-to-back,
so it sees two A's followed
immediately by two more A's.
We say that the regex processor
begins at the start
of the string,
and it consumes variables
which match patterns as it does.
It's important to note that
the regex quantifier's
syntax does not
allow you to deviate
from the MN pattern.
In particular, if you've
got an extra space in
between the braces you'll
get an empty result.
So re.findall, A, a brace
two comma space two,
we see that that's
an empty result.
As we've already seen,
if we don't include
a quantifier when
the default is 1 1.
So re.findall, we can just
use A A if we just
want to match one.
If you have one
number in the braces,
it's considered to be
both the M and the N value.
So re.findall A brace two,
two is the min and the max.
So using this we could find
a decreasing trend in the
students grades for instance.
So re.findall, and we'll look
for A's, any number of A's,
we'll use ten as the max here
as well, B's any number,
C's any number, and
then we'll pass in
grades as our string.
Now, that's a bit of
a hack because we included
a maximum that was just
arbitrarily large.
There are three other quantifiers
there used to shorthand,
that we could think
about using here.
An asterix is used to
match zero or more times,
a question mark to match
one or more times,
or a plus sign to match
one or more times.
Let's look at
a more complex example,
and load some data
scraped from Wikipedia.
So we'll open a dataset
called ferpa.txt.
This is the ferpa article
on Wikipedia as a file.
We'll read this into
a variable called Wiki.
Let's just print this
out to the screen.
So scanning through
this document,
one of the things we notice
is that the headers all have
the word edit and
braces behind them,
or rather square
brackets behind them,
followed by a new line character.
So if we wanted to get a list of
all the headers in this article,
we could do so using re.findall.
So re.findall, and
then we can say here,
well we're interested in
all characters that
are lowercase,
A through Z or
a capital case A through Z.
We're interested in somewhere
between 1-100 of
those characters,
as long as they're
followed by Edit.
We have to escape the square
braces here unfortunately,
which makes it a
little bit messier,
but we don't want to move
into the set notation.
Okay. So that didn't quite work.
It got out the headers,
but only the last
word of the header,
and it really was quite clunky.
So let's iteratively
improve on this.
First, we can use slash
W to match any letter,
including digits and numbers.
So if we do re.findall,
and then we want a character,
and we want to match slash W.
So we're not going to worry
about the A through Z's and
the lowercase capital case,
we just want any word character,
and somewhere between 1-100
of those followed by edit.
So this is something new.
Slash W is a metacharacter,
and it indicates
a special pattern
of any letter or digit.
There are actually a number of
different metacharacters
listed in the documentation.
For instance, slash S matches
any whitespace character.
Next, there are three other
quantifiers that we can
use which shorten up
the curly brace syntax.
We can use the asterix to
match 0 or more times,
so let's try that.
So re.findall, we want to
match any word character
any number of times,
so we'll just use an asterisk.
So this removes our top 100
limit followed by edit.
Now that we've
shortened the regex,
let's improve it a little bit.
We can add in spaces using
the space character.
So we could do re.findall,
and in our set
notation we want to
match either word characters or
space characters any number
of times, followed by edit.
Okay. So this gets us a list of
section titles in
the Wikipedia page.
You can now create
a list of titles by
iterating through this and
applying another regex.
So it's quite common to do,
for instance for
title and re.findall,
we put in our regex which is
matching all of the titles,
now we're going to take
the intermediate result
and split on the square bracket,
and just take the first result.
So I'll just print re.split,
and then we'll search,
and the character we're looking
for is a square bracket,
so we have to escape it,
so it looks a little nasty.
Then we just want to
take the first value of
this list which will
be the actual title.
Okay. This works but
it's a bit of a pain.
To this point, we've
been talking about
regex as a single pattern
which is matched,
but you can actually match
different patterns called
groups at the same time,
and then refer to these
groups later as you want to.
To group patterns
together use parentheses,
which is actually pretty natural.
So let's rewrite our find
all using groups.
So re.findall, and then we
start a pattern string,
and we want the first group,
so first parenthesis will
be the first part of our pattern,
so that would be
any word character
or space any number of times.
The second group will
actually just be
this edit tag that denotes
to us that it's a header.
Nice. We see that
the Python RE module
breaks out the result
group by group,
and we can actually
refer to groups by
the number as well with
the match objects
that are returned.
But how do we get back
a list of match objects?
Thus far, we've seen that
find all returns strings,
and search and match return
individual match objects,
but what do we do if we want
a list of match objects?
In this case, we use
the function finditer.
So for item in re.finditer,
and then we pass
it in this pattern
that we're interested in.
Then we can print item.groups.
So this is the groups for
a specific match item,
and we're iterating
over all of them.
So we see here that
the groups method returns
a tuple of the group.
We can get an individual group
using groups of number,
where group subzero
is the whole match,
and the other number is
the portion of the match
where we're interested in.
In this case, we want
to group sub one.
So we don't want the whole match,
we want the first item
in the match.
So for item and re.finditer,
so we'll pass in
our whitespace or
word character any number of
times as the first group,
and edit as the second group,
and we'll just print out
item.group and parameter 1.
One more piece to regex groups
that I rarely use but
it's a good idea is
labeling or naming groups.
In the previous example,
I showed you how you can use
the position of the group,
but giving them a label and
looking at the results
as a dictionary,
is actually pretty useful.
For that we use this syntax,
where we have a parenthesis,
then a question mark,
a capital P,
and then the name inside
of these angle brackets.
Where the parenthesis
starts the group,
the question mark, capital P,
indicates that this is
an extension to basic regexes,
and the name and
the angle brackets is
the dictionary key that we use,
and it's wrapped in
those angle brackets.
So for item in re.finditer,
we could use as our pattern,
our first group,
so parentheses, we
want to name it,
so question mark P.
I'll name this title,
so you see that we keep
these angle brackets.
Then we actually
put our patterns.
So we want the set operator,
which indicates
character matching,
and we want to do any words,
so slash W any word character,
as well as spaces.
So we'll put space in
there any number of times,
so we've got announced
tricks for that.
Then the second group,
we want to name this as
well, question mark P,
and we'll call this edit_ link,
for lack of a better word,
and then our pattern
here which we
have to escape
the square brackets.
So we can get the
dictionary returned for
the item using the.groupdict.
So print item.groupdict,
this is a dictionary,
so we can just do subtitle
which is our key.
Of course, we can print out
the whole dictionary for
the item too and see that
the edit string is
still in there.
So here's the dictionary kept
for the very last match.
So print item.groupdict.
There's our actual
full dictionary.
Okay. So we've seen
how we can match
individual character patterns
with the set operator,
how we can group matches
together using parenthesis.
Now, we can use quantifiers
such as asterisks,
question mark or m
to describe patterns.
Something I glossed over on
the previous example was \w,
which stands for
any word character.
So there are a number of
short hands that can be
used with regexes for
different kinds of characters
including a period for
any single character,
which is not a new line,
a \d for any digit,
and \s for any whitespace
character like spaces and tabs.
There are more and
a full list can be found in
the Python documentation
for regexes.
One more concept to
be familiar with is
called lookahead and
lookbehind matching.
In this case, the
pattern being matched to
the regex engine is for
the text either before or after
the text that we're
actually trying to isolate.
For example, in our headers,
we want to isolate the text which
comes before the edit rendering,
but we actually don't care
about the edit text itself.
Thus far, we've been
throwing the edit away.
But if we want to use them to
match but don't want
to capture them,
we could put them in
a group and use lookahead
instead with the "?=" syntax.
So let's see an example of this.
For item in re.finditer,
we're going to match two groups.
The first group is going to be
a named group called title.
We're just copying
that from before.
But the second group
is actually one of
these throwaway groups
that is lookahead.
So we're just looking for edit,
but we're actually
not matching on it.
So what this regex says
is to match two groups.
The first will be named
and called title,
and we'll have any amount of
whitespace or regular
word characters.
The second will be
the characters edit,
but we don't actually
want this item
put in our output match objects.
So we can print that item.
We see that we have
three match objects there,
their spans, and the actual
values that they matched.
Let's look at
some more Wikipedia data.
Here's some data
on universities in
the US which are Buddhist-based.
So with open from data sets,
a buddhist.txt as file,
and we'll read this into
a variable called wiki.
For good measure,
let's print this
variable output to the screen.
We can see that
each university follows
a fairly similar pattern with
the name followed by an em dash.
Then, the words "located
in" followed by the
city and the state.
I'm actually going to use
this example to show you
the verbose mode
of Python regexes.
The verbose mode
allows you to write
multi-line regexes and
increases readability.
For this mode, we
have to explicitly
indicate all
whitespace characters,
either by prepending them with
a slash or by using
the \s special value.
However, this means that we can
write our regex a bit more
like code and we can even
include comments
with the pound sign.
So pattern equals, and we'll
use this triple-quoted string,
which means we can go
on multiple lines.
So the first group we want
to match is the title.
So here, I'm going to
say I want it to be
a named group called title,
and I want any number
of characters,
so I'll just use ".*".
We'll add a comment,
the university title.
The next group is
going to be a space,
sorry, the em dash
followed by a space.
So I'm escaping
that, in this case,
located space in space.
So this is just some indicator
of the location.
I don't care about this, so
I'm not naming this group.
The next one we'll make
is the named group city,
and this is any number
of word characters.
So this is the city that
the university is in.
Then, we have
some separator, comma,
space, that we see
is a common pattern.
I don't care about this, so
I won't name this group.
Then, we'll name
another group, the state.
It's just like city, any
number of word characters.
So the state, the city is in.
Then, we'll end
the triple-quoted string.
So now, when we call finditer,
we just pass the re.VERBOSE
flag as the last parameter.
This makes it much easier to
understand large regexes.
So we just use this
like previous.
We say for item in re.finditer,
we pass in the pattern,
we pass in our source text,
but because it's
this multi-line verbose mode,
we say re.VERBOSE to
let the processor know.
We can get the
dictionary returned to
us for the item with
the.groupdict value.
So we print item.groupdict.
So there we see our output is
a set of universities,
their cities,
and their states, and all
of the groups that we
didn't name they're matched,
so they're consumed by
the processor, but
they're thrown away.
Here's another example
from the New York Times
which covers health
tweets on news items.
This data came out of the UC
Irvine Machine
Learning Repository,
which is a great source of
different kinds of data.
So with open
datasets/nytimeshealth.txt as file,
and we'll read everything
into a variable,
and take a look at it.
So health equals file.read.
We'll look at health.
That's a lot of tweet data.
So here, we can see
there are tweets
and the fields are
separated by pipes.
Let's try and get
a list of all of
the hashtags that are
included in this data.
Now, in Twitter, a hashtag
begins with a pound sign,
or the hash mark,
and continues until
some whitespace is found.
So let's create a pattern.
We want to include
the hash sign first,
then any number of
alphanumeric characters,
and we end when we
see some whitespace.
So a pattern is equal to
the hash mark followed
by word characters or
digits and an asterisk,
any number of those.
Then, we'll use a lookahead
just looking for any whitespace.
So we use \s in this case.
We could've used a space if we
weren't worried about
tabs and so forth.
Notice that the ending is
lookahead because we're not
actually interested in matching
this whitespace and
returning the value.
Also, notice that I used
an asterisk instead of
the plus for matching of
alphabetical characters or digits
because a plus would require
at least one of each.
So let's search and display
all of the hashtags.
So re.findall pattern and health.
So we can see that here
there are lots of Ebola
related tweets in
this particular dataset.
This lecture has been an
overview of regular expressions.
Really, we've just scratched
the surface of what you can do.
Now, I actually find
regexes really frustrating.
They're incredibly powerful.
But if you don't use
them for a while,
you're left grasping for
memory of some of the details,
especially named groups
and lookahead searches.
But there are lots of great
examples and reference guides on
the web including the Python
documentation for regex.
With these in hand, you
should be able to write
concise and readable code
which performs well too.
Having basic regex literacy is
a core skill for
applied data scientists.